good afternoon and welcome to today's
Downing Street press conference I'm
pleased to be joined today by Professor
Jonathan van tan let me start by
updating you on the latest information
from the government's Cobra data file
through our monitoring and testing
program as of today two million two
hundred and nineteen thousand two
hundred and eighty one tests for
coronavirus have now been carried out in
the UK including a new record of one
hundred and twenty six thousand and
sixty four tests carried out yesterday
two hundred and thirty three thousand
one hundred and fifty one people have
tested positive that's an increase of
three thousand four hundred and forty
six cases since yesterday eleven
thousand and forty-one people are in
hospital with kovat 19 that's down 14%
from a week ago
and sadly of those tested positive for
coronavirus 33 thousand six hundred and
fourteen have now died that's an
increase of four hundred and twenty
eight fatalities since yesterday this
new figure does include all deaths in
all settings not just in hospitals our
deepest sympathies go out to the
families and friends as this nation
battles to defeat the disease today I'm
going to set out how whilst the country
has been a virtual standstill this
downtime has been used to fix and
upgrade the nation's road and rail
infrastructure along with plans to help
our economy bounce back but before I set
out today's transport announcements let
me briefly remind you of the
government's roadmap out of this crisis
grab first slide please
as you know we've been we've established
a new covert alert system with five
levels based primarily on the r-value
and the number of cases throughout the
lockdown
we've been at level four thanks to the
British people we brought the are down
and we can now begin moving carefully to
level three
like two from this week we're at step
one on that slide meaning that those who
cannot work from home should now speak
to their employer about going back to
work you can now spend time outdoors and
exercise as much as you like you can
meet one person who's not part of your
household outside provided you do stay
two meters apart step 2
from June the first at the earliest and
as long as it's safe
we aim to allow primary schools to
reopen for some pupils in smaller class
sizes non-essential retail to start to
reopen and cultural and sporting events
to take place behind closed doors and
without crowds and then on step three no
earlier than July the fourth and again
only if the data says it's safe to do so
we aim to allow more businesses to open
including those offering personal care
those in the leisure sector together
with places of worship next slide please
we can control this virus if we stay
alert but what does staying alert
actually mean staying alert for the vast
majority of people still means staying
at home as much as possible and working
from home if you can but it also means
limiting contact with other people
keeping your distance if you go out
washing your hands regularly wearing a
face covering in enclosed spaces where
it's difficult to be socially distanced
for example on public transport and if
you or anyone in your household has
symptoms you all need to self isolate
today I want to update you on the
measures we're taking to speed up our
economic recovery while keeping people
safe for two months we've remained
locked down traveling as little as
possible and in doing so the whole
country has protected the NHS and helped
reduce the number of kovat infections
but as we begin making tentative steps
towards restarting our economy and
people in some sectors who can't work
from home are beginning to return to
work place
it is clear the transport has a critical
role to play last Saturday I explained
why it's our civic duty to avoid public
transport if at all possible because
even when we have 100% of the services
up and running there may only be
socially distant space available for 1
in 10 passengers
therefore in order to help reduce
crowding we set out a 2 billion pound
program to put cycling and walking at
the heart of transport with 250 million
pounds of that emergency money spending
already underway over the past week we
followed this up by publishing three
pieces of detailed guidance first for
local authorities in England explaining
how they should prepare for
significantly increased numbers of both
cyclists and pedestrians next for the
transport sector to ensure that they
provide safer services for those
travelling and safer workplaces for
their staff and third and most
importantly for passengers we're asking
the public to help ensure that the
transport system does not become
significantly overwhelmed by returning
commuters the guidance makes it clear
that if you can't walk or cycle but you
do have access to a car please
use it rather than traveling by bus
train or tram especially where the
public transport is liable to be
overcrowded and for those people who
absolutely need to use public transport
it also explains how you can best
protect yourself and those around you in
the coming weeks as we carefully and
cautiously restart sectors of our
economy and people begin to travel once
again they should notice that whilst the
country has been in downtime with the
roads and railways quite quiet we have
been busy getting on with essential work
fixing the nation's infrastructure so we
can recover faster when the time comes
this upgrade programme the kind of work
that at any other time will cause
inevitable
disruption and service delays whilst
costing the taxpayer more has instead
carried out in previously previously
unimaginable circumstances of a largely
unused transport network for example
we've completed four hundred and
nineteen separate Network Rail projects
over Easter with a further 1,000
upgrades being carried out through
throughout the may bank holiday
meanwhile highways England has been busy
accelerating maintenance projects on the
nation's roads last week for example we
opened the vital a 14 upgrade seven
months ahead of schedule this is route
normally used by eighty-five thousand
drivers daily which will dramatically
improve access to the UK's largest
container Port of Felixstowe
and permanently boost the distribution
of goods around the UK as northern
powerhouse Minister a camera bought that
in the north we've delivered nineteen
six million pounds of rail
infrastructure improvements during April
and throughout the country we've
accelerated maintenance projects on road
and rail whilst always sticking to
public health England safety guidelines
so that all together highways England
has delivered over 200 million pounds of
upgrades and Network Rail has delivered
550 million pounds worth during April
alone I'd like to thank the army of
Transport and construction workers
who've been grafting very hard
throughout this lockdown but to make
sure that Britain is ready to bounce
back from coronavirus today I can
announce nearly two billion pounds to
upgrade our roads and our railways to
put our transport infrastructure in the
best possible shape and to get our
economy growing
once again this package includes 1.7
billion pounds for local roads making
journeys smoother and safer for drivers
holiest cyclists motorcyclists
pedestrians and others by filling
millions of dangerous potholes we can
make our roads safer and encourage more
people to cycle or even take part in the
upcoming
Scooter trials helping more people play
our part in relieving public pressure on
public transport this investment will
help fix damage caused by the winter
flooding repair roads and bridges and
fund numerous road improvement schemes
as more people become mobile again we'll
also be building a network of rapid
charging stations for electric cars
including a big expansion of rapid
charging facilities of motorway service
stations helping the country to lock in
the dramatic air quality improvements
we've experienced during the coronavirus
lockdown amid all the sad news and the
tragedy of loved ones we've lost we
somehow managed to do things in weeks
that would normally take years building
new hospitals moving public services
online making instant reforms and
fast-track new laws extraordinary
changes in the way that employers and
employees work effectively taking
Suede's of the economy online almost
overnight now we want to ensure that we
can maintain this momentum in building
if building a new hospital takes just
two weeks
why should building a new road still
take as long as 20 years if GP surgeries
can move online why are most rail
passengers still traveling on cardboard
tickets we must exploit our newfound
capacity to respond at pace and apply it
to rapidly improving our infrastructure
and we must examine why it is that
bureaucratic blind weed makes British
infrastructure some of the cosmas and
slowest in Europe to build because
whilst many will continue to work from
home after this crisis both the long
term transport trend and the pressing
need communities to level up across the
country to take that infrastructure will
be even more important in stimulating
our recovery and securing supporting new
jobs so by combining fast home internet
access with vastly upgraded transport
connections we can help revive many
our small and medium-sized towns which
over the decades have been left behind
this has been a devastating start to the
year not just for Britain but for the
world and we are only a phase 1 of that
recovery plan but we all know that it is
our reaction to adversity that will
ultimately define how we recover we must
harness our approach to tackling the
pandemic and apply it to rebuilding our
own infrastructure with the same swift
action innovation and collective
determination that has characterized us
over the past few weeks and in doing so
we can emerge stronger I'd like to turn
now to Jonathan van tan for the data
figures Thank You Secretary of State
good afternoon to you all and I'm going
to go through the today's slides
beginning with some new data these are
social distancing data they've been
collected by the Office for National
Statistics and they represent the period
from the 24th of April to the 3rd of May
this year and what they show to you
quite clearly is that 80 percent of
adults in Great Britain only left their
homes for the permitted reasons if at
all 91 percent of adults avoided contact
with vulnerable people and compared with
12% last year 44 percent of employed
adults worked from home in that period
so you can see that there have been very
dramatic and very important changes that
the British people have made that have
contributed to where we are now in terms
of being able to begin easing the social
distancing restrictions that we've been
under for so many weeks next slide
please
now this slide shows you in a bit more
detail testing and new cases across the
UK from the period 6th of April the left
of the
through to the 14th of May on the right
and the top array in pink is testing
please bear in mind that some people a
very small proportion will have been
tested more than once but nevertheless
on the 14th of May 126,000 tests were
recorded work were performed this is a
new record it's goes on the back of over
to 2.2 million tests and delivered in
total and in terms of confirmed cases on
the 14th of May there were 3000 446
confirmed cases against a total of 230
3151 if you look carefully at the bottom
graph the green graph you can now see a
gradual drag downward trend in the
number of confirmed cases next slide
please
these are new data again recently
published by the Office for National
Statistics based upon a survey of
households that will eventually get to a
total size of 10,000 households surveyed
what it shows you our data from the 27th
of April through to the 10th of May and
these are estimates based upon the
sample but these are estimates for all
of England and the estimate is that in
that time period 148 thousand patient
people were infected with kovat 19 that
is naught point two seven percent of the
English population which is just under
three people infected in every 1000 so
that is really now quite a low level of
infection in the community that is being
picked up through this survey and this
survey will be repeated regularly over
time it's going to be able to share as
regional trends and regional data and
the data will feed
to the joint biosecurity Center to help
us keep a very close eye on Cove it 19
as we move forwards next slide please
I'm turning now to the data from
hospitals the upper curve shows new
daily admissions from the 24th of March
through to the 12th of May the bottom
curve shows that the percentage of
critical care beds occupied by Ovid 19
patients and there are four traces
they're covering the five traces I beg
your pardon
covering for traces covering the four
nations of the UK what you can see on
both of those slides are now long steady
declines in admissions and the
proportion of critical care beds
occupied by covered 19 patients this is
clearly extremely good news and shows
that the pressure on hospitals is now
beginning to ease over the page please
thank you this further data shows the
total number of people in hospital with
kovat 19 across the UK and the general
pattern across the UK you can see now is
clearly downwards there's been a 14%
drop in the total number of people in
hospital since last week and again this
is moving in the right direction next
slide please
this slide sadly shows deaths due to
covert 19 confirmed with a positive test
right across the UK beginning at the
14th of March on the left of the slide
and moving to the 14th of May and there
have been 428 deaths with a confirmed
test reported on the 14th of May but as
importantly now if you look at the slide
itself and look at the yellow curve
picking out the seven-day rolling
average this decline is now continuing
and it is sustained which again is a
very positive sign indeed thank you
thank you very much Jonathan we turn now
to questions first from the members of
the public Helen from session my son is
due to start the final year of his
engineering degree at Durham in October
which cannot be done purely online he
has to start paying rent on his student
house in July and take out the student
loan of nine thousand two hundred and
fifty pounds in August
if lectures move online he will be
thousands of pounds worse off and will
also miss out on the student experience
there was no mention of students or
universities in the government's plan to
rebuild on Monday what is the
government's plan for students and
universities this autumn thank you well
heaven thank you very much we certainly
share an interest I also have a son at
university wondering about exactly the
same issues and that of course comes
down to what happens with the pace from
the charts that Professor was just
showing us of the decline in this and
disease and of course it will be the
case that if we can get those numbers
down than all different parts of the
economy will start to be able to reopen
I think it's too early to say but the
Education Secretary will be returning to
this subject and will be providing us
all with further guidance and like you
Helen I'm very interested to hear it
when it comes there is something we can
all do in the mean time which is when we
say stay alert ensure that we do have
that social distancing
in place particularly as some of the
tentative first baby steps in non
lock/unlock start to happen so I think
it is a wait-and-see but we're
absolutely aware of the concerns and we
want to make sure that we beat this
virus in a way that can allow parts of
society including education higher and
further education to get going again
can I turn to a nanny from Farnborough
and this is going to be a written
question millions of people have had
their operations and other Hospital
procedures postponed indefinitely can
the government say when elective surgery
and other delayed treatments will
recommence well yes now it's definitely
the case that we want the NHS which as
Jonathan was just demonstrating has
capacity increasingly coming back into
it because the number of people in
hospital for kovat has been coming down
to be able to take up routine operations
that many of which haven't stopped but
some of which I know that the health
secretary has referred to specifically
and he'll be saying more about that soon
I don't know Jonathan there's anything
that you wanted to add from that only
really to say that and we absolutely
understand that the National Health
Service is not a Kovan treatment service
it has had to focus on that in the last
few months but we're very conscious
everybody in health is conscious of the
fact that as soon as is physically and
humanly possible services must be
restored to normal but that takes time
and it has to be done at a paced
measured safe way it is worth noting
that no time has the NHS become
overwhelmed we've got the Nightingale
hospitals we've managed to increase the
capacity and the NHS done a phenomenal
job of that so
and we as Jonathan rightly says we want
to make sure that it is there for
everything and we also encourage people
to continue contacting their GP or
dialing one-one-one to make sure that
they're getting the support that they
require from the NHS can we turn now to
questions from the media and Allison
Holt's of the BBC the criteria state
there's growing anger amongst people
within the care sector about what they
see is the ongoing
lowness of the government's response to
their needs their problems they are
still waiting for instance for details
of the infection control plan that was
announced yesterday it's two months into
the pandemic what would you say to
reassure them that this is going to
change and also a question from my
sports colleagues for professor van Tam
you've been involved in talks with
Premier League players how likely is it
to be safe enough to return to
competitive football by June the 12th
Alan thank you very much indeed look
with care homes that they are actually
sort of specialists in infection control
that's something that care homes
I understand often routinely at the
frontline of handling are often more so
than hospitals and many of them all of
them will be knowing exactly what to do
and testament to that is that in the in
the majority the vast majority of care
homes kovat 19 hasn't been reported at
all however it certainly is the case and
we've seen these figures from the w-h-o
who say that in Europe as a whole over
50% of deaths of taking place in care
homes not so in English care homes that
the figure has been about 25 percent
overall but it is absolutely essential
that they are provided with every
provision I just want to give you an
example of that care homes often
privately owned
we're actually always buying their own
PPE that's how it's always worked the
government stepped in very quickly -
although as you know well covered
massive global shortage helped to
provide PPE to care home with millions
of pieces delivered so there's been a
sort of big national effort to assist
them and I know that the health
secretary will be saying more about that
soon but I don't want to sort of
underestimate the extraordinary work
that's gone in to care homes to make
sure that most of them have indeed
remained kovat free in the meantime as
well I'll go to Jonathan though Mike to
come back yes cotton football
as you know the overall approach with
easing social distancing has been one
that has been tentative measured slow
and stepwise and that is exactly the
plan that is underway for all of elite
sport not just football that there will
be small carefully measured stepwise
approaches to seeing what can be
achieved safely the first of those is
really to return to safe training still
observing social distancing and measures
are you know taking place that plans are
taking place at quite some depth to be
ready to do that and that will be a
stepwise thing we will have to see how
that goes before it is time to move on
or even think about moving on to the
return of competitive football matches
as you have outlined in your question so
I think you know we have to be slow we
have to be measured Alice I'm just going
to give you the opportunity to come back
on either of those yes if I could want
one more question on care homes and the
care sector in Scotland care home
residents that have tested Kovach
positive will now have to have two
negative tests before they can return to
that care home is that something that's
going to be introduced in England it's
probably more a question for the for the
medical experts and public health
England than me I did just want to
mention in regard to testing though that
it's important to know that everybody in
a care home that doesn't matter whether
that is a care home worker or resident
and doesn't matter where they are
symptomatic or asymptomatic can now be
tested and there are different routes to
testing one of which is there are now
hundred and sixteen is the latest figure
116 mobile testing units which can
actually physically as required or if
required go to a care home as well which
is helpful helpful to know but I think
on the sort of detailed what the medical
advice would be again I'll turn to the
professor yeah so I just say there's an
absolutely enormous effort
now to increase the amount of daily
tests performed in care homes and
testing is part of the discharge process
before patients are discharged from NHS
facilities to care homes Jonathan thank
you very much indeed I'll turn now to
Tom Clark at ITV Thank You Secretary of
State my question relates to antibody
tests that have been in the headlines
today the Prime Minister described
antibody tests as game-changing is that
still the government's position and if
so when can we expect to see their
game-changing potential actually
deployed in this epidemic and how are
you going to prioritize those will they
go straight to care homes or frontline
health care workers first thanks Tom I
look I think first of all I'll hand over
to Jonathan for the the medical side of
this but I think it's very exciting that
there's a a very very reliable possibly
even 100% reliable antibody test that's
the test of course that shows whether or
not you've actually had grown virus in
the past rather than currently and
therefore develop the antibodies it's
very good news
particularly if it transpires that this
makes you immune at least for a period
from getting coronavirus again I think
therein is the question mark within your
question I'll come back to you after
it's but I'm going to ask professor
jonathan van town just to address that
point yeah so thank you for the question
you're absolutely right we have been
waiting for a really good antibody test
to be ready there are now at least two
available one of those has received its
C mark on the 28th of April the rosh
test it has been validated by public
health England on the 7th of May and I
anticipate that it will be rapidly
rolled out in the days and weeks to come
as soon as it is practical to do so I
also anticipate that the focus will be
on the National Health Service and on
carers in the first instance and it has
taken time what we required was a test
was highly specific and to explain to
people what that means it means that the
chances of a false positive are
extremely low with this test and I'm
sure you can understand that if we had
used a test where it was possible of
giving a false positive result and
therefore saying to people you have
antibodies to Co vid 19 when in fact you
don't that would have been very
undesirable indeed so absolutely this is
a good test that will stand us in good
stead moving forwards and I think it
will be incredibly important as the days
weeks and months go by now there are
some science pieces that need to go
along with that and please remember that
this is a virus that emerged in December
so the totality of human learning on
this virus has been in the last five
months that's not long to get to know
all the ins and outs of a virus and one
of the things that we've needed to know
is after infection and recovery whether
there is an antibody response and it's
clear that in most cases there is but
you can't just apply this test you have
to wait at least 14 days preferably 28
days after after the infection in order
to be sure to pick up the antibodies if
they are there the next thing to say is
it's going to take as time to understand
whether the antibodies in all cases
protect against infection and you can't
speed up the answer to that you have to
carefully study people who've recovered
people who you know have got antibodies
and follow them and track them and see
if they become reinfected and over time
hopefully you get the answer that
they're not but that is data that has to
be gathered over time and then finally
if you understand that antibodies do
protect you
against reinfection from this disease
the final science question is how long
into the future do the antibodies last
for it is not automatic that by any
means that these are going to be
lifelong
we just don't know we'll have to take
people with antibodies and measure them
over time to understand how long the
antibodies stay in the body and that is
something that I'm afraid scientists all
around the world have to be patient
about and have to wait for the answers
now those answers may come from other
parts of the world they may come from
the UK where there's enormous efforts
being put into what we call long term
serology surveys to understand all of
this but it isn't something that you can
compress through time in a science sense
no matter how hard you try we just have
to learn as we go along
but the good news is we do now have
antibody tests that we absolutely can
rely on thank you very much Jonathan so
Tom I think to answer your question if
all of those things end up being yes and
it actually provides that kind of
immunity then for sure it would be
game-changing because it would enable us
to do things in terms of releasing
lockdowns that wouldn't be possible
otherwise I think your second part of
your question was about quantity I don't
know the exact answer to that hundreds
of thousands if not millions will be the
answer I'm sure but it's a very positive
development and we're delighted that
it's happened do you want to come back
at all
may I be permitted just one one
follow-up yes just as I understand it
there are other tests and spend time
just to lead you to that not just rot I
believe Abbott Laboratories have an
effective antibody test as well getting
the impression the government is doing a
deal with rush is that are we having an
exclusive relationship here or are we
going to try and spread our bets given
the uncertain things that still remain
in terms of the science and secondly
have these tests being validated against
people with very low levels and these a
symptomatic cases because that's the
game-changing element is how many people
out there have
actually had coded 19 we won't know that
we can't spot the boy they symptomatic
and so on that second point I know the
tests were carried out a port and down
by PhD Jonathan may know more about it
on the first point of course we'll want
to get as much as many tests as possible
we've never restricted ourselves with
that regard and we've we've looked at
other anti-body tests before this which
actually just didn't stack up one suite
tested them including some very early on
and unless you have that hundred percent
accuracy they're not helpful in
individual cases though I think it is
true to say that you can have less than
100% accuracy accuracy and come up with
a usual a useful survey of a wider
percentage and come up with
statistically useful information it's
not the same as having what appears to
be there now and you know I think to
these questions we'll have to wait and
see and the answer and I don't know if
you wanted to add anything on the
testing side of things well so on the on
the contracting point doctors aren't
told that kind of thing and I'm sure I
couldn't talk about it anyway because
it's undoubtedly commercially sensitive
I'm an epidemiologist not a laboratory
scientist so I think the question you're
asking is is there a kind of threshold
below which the tests cannot pick up a
very faint signal and I don't know the
answer to that I think the Secretary of
State is right that does not change
their value in understanding what is
going on in the British population and
how many of us have now been exposed to
this disease being infected even if we
may not have known it at the time and
now have antibodies and that's going to
be a critical piece of understanding as
we go forwards because we're going to
have to live with this virus for quite
some time
certainly until a vaccine comes along
Tom thanks very much as fascinating and
extremely important and actually quite
hopeful area given the news on that
antibody today I'd like to turn now to
Charlotte either sort or radio Thank You
Secretary of State's NHS England were
due to publish some data today on the
number of
operations canceled in March 2020
that takes release has itself been
cancelled and I'm quoting from the Gulf
top UK website here it says these
statistics will not be collected and
published for the periods due to the
coronavirus illness and due to the need
for capacity to release capacity across
the NHS so can we be absolutely clear
here does the government know how many
urgent operations were canceled in March
thanks very much Charlotte simple answer
I don't know the answer to that it is
the case that in all in all these
situations we're trying to get data out
as as much as possible both as a
government we found that to be a useful
process to just put data out there so
people can analyze it but also of course
people like the Office of National
Statistics who look after the nation's
statistics and the NHS who have a very
big and statistics function I guess from
your description it's the first I've
heard of it about it but I guess from
your description it is just a
prioritization issue and actually it
with your permission I'll ask the health
secretary when I speak to them and make
sure we specifically get you an answer
and to your question unless Jonathan
knows anything off topic I don't have
that answer I'm afraid I don't know
enough about the way that the statistics
are are delivered within the NHS to
answer the question I'll just give you a
chance to come back Charlotte in case
you've got a full on absolutely I think
yes from from long ago
don't UK website it does seem to be the
case of prioritization but obviously
things are urgent operations hmm and
therefore I'm surprised to see the
government hasn't taken it as a priority
to assess how many you have actually
been canceled and so what I can
certainly tell you is I will and check
in with the health secretary immediately
after this and we'll find out what we
know about it it will as you rightly say
possibly be a question of prioritization
or as in other cases during coronavirus
and the NHS having to put resources
elsewhere in order to get things going
and that said I'd be surprised if we
haven't got a pretty
firm knowledge on the number of
operations I do see statistics mentioned
mostly by the media on this all the time
let's find out the answer for you and
you can rebroadcast it thank you very
much indeed thank you for the question
go into a gym Picard of the FT Jim
Secretary of State back in March you
bailed out almost the entire railway
industry the Transport for London is
running out of money fast and Sadiq Khan
the mayor has said that and basically
hours away from some major cash crunch I
understand you're close to some kind of
rescue deal for them but they're saying
that they need money not just from the
spring the summer the autumn but they
need money possibly for several years if
social distancing is to remain on the
tube and on London buses is that
something that you can commit to and my
second question for professor Bantam the
government has drawn up plans to
introduce quarantine for people coming
to the UK from anywhere in the world two
weeks but under one proposal France
would be excluded as a scientist do you
think there's any scientific rationale
for that idea of excluding the French
Jim thanks very much look on TfL and
actually this applies of course wider
across our entire network as you point
out right at the beginning of this
crisis we had a rescue package for all
of the railways we subsequently also
helped the bus companies trams ferries
many others to work through this crisis
not least to ensure that critical
workers were able to get to places like
the NHS social care and all the other
important work that's been going on so
it you know we are now in a situation
where I am optimistic of having a
solution with TfL and and the mayor of
London
we don't know the answer to the second
part of your question there which is
well what would happen if this lasted
for very much longer and it went on for
you know more than you know a few months
of course we're all working to make sure
that we get rid of the virus or get rid
of it as much as possible which is why I
think the data that the professor of
Jonathan van Thomas is showing I was so
so good to see that the number of
infections seem to be coming down but we
don't know what the long term will be
however I am confident in the short term
TfL London Underground and the buses and
indeed
trains and buses throughout the rest of
the country will continue to run and I'm
encouraging the mayor to make sure we
get that back to a hundred percent very
quickly as people are starting to travel
more it's very very important as I was
saying in my comments earlier that we do
not have overcrowding and now I think
there's a question on the Select
demonology of them 14 days isolation
yeah so thank you for the question about
quarantine as I understand it
discussions are still ongoing about what
the final shape of measures at the UK
borders will look like and that's not
for me to comment while those
discussions are still going on but you
asked a question about the science and
about quarantine making sense given that
the incubation period of this illness is
up to 14 days then asking people who
cross the UK border to stay at home for
14 days to self isolate means that they
can't develop symptoms or become
infectious just before the development
of symptoms and be out there at large in
our community so that's scientifically
very important and where quarantine and
when quarantine makes most sense
scientifically is when the incidence the
de level of disease the level of new
cases in the receiving country in this
case the UK is low and it makes most
sense in terms of travelers coming from
areas where the incidence is high Jim do
you want to come back on either of those
points just on there on the TfL point
are you expecting the meds of introduced
higher fares as part of a rescue package
and and do I understand it professor and
some that you're saying that because we
have a higher infection rate than France
then that's not really a problem in
which case why wouldn't we apply the
same rule to other countries with alone
right on the first point I can actually
comment on the second one if you like as
well on high fares look it's very
important I think in providing a rescue
package for TfL that the London Mayor
can work with that we don't end up in a
situation where people from outside the
capital are unfairly carrying the burden
and by which I mean sadly I have to
stand up and do them each year fares do
end up having to rise with inflation
otherwise everyone knows there's less
money going into the system and if you
have consistent fare freezes it means
that more money isn't going into the
system and you can't then have an unfair
settlement where other British taxpayers
are effectively bailing out the system
albeit that the system in this case is
in trouble because clearly of
coronavirus and so there is the right
balance to be made to answer your
question ahead on and in terms of the 14
days and what happens at our borders to
pick up on your last point which
probably better aimed at me but we're
working on the detail of this let's wait
till we've seen it as a principle though
it seems fair and right that if we're
asking the British people to stay at
home and you know make such huge
sacrifices and their own lives then we
would expect anybody coming back to the
country to do the same thing or visiting
the country to do the same thing with
some limited exceptions and for the
reasons that Jonathan was explaining it
makes sense to do that as our own level
of infections come under control not to
effectively reom portent and of course
now we have things like the testing and
tracking capacity to do that it's worth
mentioning actually that in terms of the
testing and tracking app I know that the
health sector will say more about it
shortly but there are now over half the
residents of the Isle of Wight where
this is being tested out who have
downloaded the tracking app for the
first time or in total rather the actual
number is seventy two thousand three
hundred which means that over half of
our white have downloaded that and one
of the things we'll be asking people to
do at the border when they come in is to
download the app and provide
with contact details so that we know
where people are so I think it's a very
sensible proportionate approach to
making sure we don't rien port a problem
once we've got these numbers under
control particularly now we have that
test and tracking capability which
wouldn't have existed
some time ago Jim thank you very much
indeed I'm going to turn to John
Stephens of the Daily Mail John thank
you transport secretary you're asking
people to use cars instead of public
transport
aside from Robo upgrades that are likely
to take some time what are you going to
do to help motorists now how local
councils be asked to scrap parking
charges or get rid of parking
restrictions could people get helped by
a car thanks John the first of all is an
unusual situation for a transport
secretary to be in to actively ask
people to avoid particularly busy times
or actually at busy times public
transport and it's very very important
that we get this right otherwise that
become a major way to spread the disease
if people can't maintain social
distancing so yes the car if you can't
use other active forms of transport like
cycling or or walking and then the car
is certainly the the option that comes
about one of the things as I mentioned
in my opening comments that we've
enjoyed during this a few things it's
been better during the lockdown has been
the air quality which has gone up
dramatically and we want to maintain
some of that and so incentives for
people to over time switch to electric
vehicles the money that I announced both
on Saturday when I spoke from here but
also today for upgrading electric
charging is really important because it
helps people feel comfortable and not
experience range anxiety if they get an
electric car which which helps but also
in terms of cars and the pothole work
has been going on throughout but there
will be an expansion of that to fix our
roads make it better for drivers of
course fuel charges have come down the
cost of petrol to come down quite a lot
during this crisis and you're right
about the balance of parking charges and
different zones because there are times
now where we are literally
encouraging people to drive perhaps
close to but maybe not right
- perhaps a town or city that they work
in and find a place to park so we're
working not just with local authorities
on this John but also with some large
entertainment venues who have car parks
which aren't being used at the moment
and looking at all those possibility
searches it's a very good point I'll
just come back to you John
okay I just want to ask a quick question
about holidays um when the hospitality
industry is allowed to start opening up
again do you think holidays outside such
as camping or caravanning could be seen
as carrying less risk than staying in
hotels and could they be allowed to open
sooner well I'll certainly ask Jonathan
to ask part answer part of that but on
the broader point just so we're clear
where we are today and where where we
hope we're headed and today although you
can now travel any distance for example
to go and exercise you must still um
stay in your own home in the at night
and so you can't at the moment book
holiday accommodation or
bed-and-breakfast or stay over anywhere
but over a period of time and I set out
in that slide earlier phases one two and
three we are saying that we will look to
unlock if the data says it's possible
and if not we'll have to stop I'm afraid
but if we can will unlock and at that
point my impression is that outdoors
actually is things stand at the moment
is a lesser risk than indoors but right
now I'm going to stop and defer to an
expert professor yes thank you so the
two epidemiological concepts that are
important in keeping the infection rate
down is staying within household groups
and minimizing the contact between
households that's one point it is
absolutely a narrow biological truism
that outdoor environments are much less
risk than indoor environments but of
course that will need some careful
thinking about because sharing a tent is
a small enclosed space or can be a small
enclosed space with generally pork and
poor conditions of ventilation and I
guess it depends who you're sharing it
with same for a caravan so it's not as
straightforward as it might
sound indoors outdoors hotels campsites
it's a little more complex than that
and it will take some careful thought
and now you've mentioned it I'll begin
to give that a bit of careful thought
thank you very much
Jonathan and thank you John and actually
also your readers for the tremendous
work on PPE and the campaign that you've
been running which has been greatly
appreciated can I turn to
William Telford from Plymouth life
William good afternoon I'd like to ask
the Secretary of State come to questions
specific to Plymouth and following up on
the last question on the hospitality
industry I don't know how much you know
about Plymouth but 2020 was set to be a
very big year for us with the Mayflower
400 celebrations those have all now been
postponed the city has suffered a 71
million pound loss in tourism in just
the time of the pandemic its lost 20
million pounds from loss of student
revenue and the City Council is saying
is now set to lose 50 million pounds
from lost income and increased costs
this puts us economy of this city in
some some water to stay at jeopardy
it's a city they already have some of
the worst deprivation areas in the
southwest if not the whole country and a
history of underfunding so I wonder if
the secretary state can tell us is there
anything you can do or planning to do to
specifically help cities such as
Plymouth that have unique problems and
secondly in light of what French prime
minister said today about restarting
domestic holidays in France from July
and August and bearing in mind the
problems we've got with the hospitality
sector here could we expect a similarly
clear announcement before July July the
4th and will there be any sort Support
Package expressly for hospitality thank
you very much indeed for those questions
William and so I think Plymouth is
actually like many areas experiencing
the worst of the coronavirus sites
clearly and
decimated things like planned
celebrations and I was aware of the one
that was planned for this year I did
check before seeing you were coming on
and I know that the government's
business support package in Plymouth has
allocated 47 million pounds so Plymouth
and has also paid over 3200 grants
totaling over 39 million pounds to
organizations there also you will recall
from other ministers saying it we're
allocating 3.2 billion pounds of
additional funding to local governments
and I make that point to address your
wider issue of towns and places like
Plymouth the cities like Plymouth and to
respond to the coronavirus of which
Plymouth has received fifteen point
seven million pounds of that money to
date on your second point
um look France as I was talking to my
opposite number last night john baptiste
DeBarge a and we were having this
discussion France is probably two or
three weeks ahead of where the UK was
were check this with Jonathan into this
virus into the crisis and so they've
been making decisions at every stage a
little bit ahead of us it's unknown
because we will want to get through
those phases that I described on the
slide before we know that it these
things can't come before we've said it
not before July the 4th phase 3 which
what opens a much wider potential but we
do need to make sure that the our rate
and the number of cases in community and
in society it is a level that where we
can unlock before we can do that and
I'll just because it's a epidemiological
question also throw it over to Jonathan
I don't think I've really much to add
other than that the landmass in France
is clearly larger for a fairly similar
population size and population density
is going to be much less in France as a
whole outside of the cities and that
undoubtedly is the kind of difference
that will need to be thought about very
carefully before making too many
international comparisons don't thank
you William thank you
indeed and brings us the end of our
questions I was just going to wrap up by
saying it is clearly important if we
want to as so many of those questions
requests to get to the next phases and
unlock other parts of the economy that
we all continue to stay alert and
staying alert means remembering to go
back to all the things we were being
told about at the at the beginning like
washing your hands carrying hands and
sanitizer making sure that you stay two
meters apart and if anyone you or
anybody else in your household is ill
please remember to stay isolated and at
home for 14 days thank you very much
thank you to Jonathan thanks for today
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch BBC news live in the app and get
the full story with BBC decoder UK
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with BBC News